The following is the Jira Documentation for User types and roles:

Licensed users manage customer requests in your instance of JIRA Service Desk.
These are most likely your project administrators, service desk team members,
employees and even contractors. They track and resolve your customers' requests,
transition issues through workflows, and contribute to their team's service level
agreements (SLAs).

Unlicensed users raise requests and interact with service desk agents for free.
These are your customers. They submit requests via your service desks's customer
portal or email address, comment on requests, and read knowledge base articles.
Customers do not require a license, so you can have an unlimited number of customers
who can submit an unlimited number of requests, free of charge.

Most of the information in these documents focuses on two licensed roles:
administrators and agents. The administrator sets up and configures service
desk projects. The agent works in these projects.

Admins:

Project administrators for your service desk can:

Access all features in JIRA Service Desk

Manage users and roles in service desk projects

Set up customer portals, request types, queues, reports and SLAs.

Perform all tasks that agents can

Agents:

Service desk team members who work on customer requests can:

View the customer portal, queues, reports and SLA metrics for a project

Add, edit, and delete customer-facing and internal comments on issues

Add customers to a project

Read knowledge base content

Manage organizations (if allowed at the application level)

Create knowledge base content (with a Confluence license)

Customers:

THe people you serve through your service desk can:

Raise requests via the customer portal or email channel

Track their requests in the customer portal

Read knowledge base articles

Approve other customer's requests

SHare requests with other customers (if allowed by Customer Permissions)

All this is free for your customers.

How a service Desk Works:

Here is how your customers and service desk agents work together to resolve a request:

1. Your customer submits a request to your service agents through a portal or via email.

2. A service desk agent sees the request in their JIRA Service Desk queue and looks into the issue.

3. Your customer and other participants use the portal or email to discuss the request with your
service desk agent, who works in JIRA Service Desk.

4. Your agent completes the request and your customer is satisfied.

Requests vs. Issues

Your customers submit a request through the customer portal or by email. These requests
become issues that your agents work on in their agent view.

How customers see their requests in the customer portal:

Help Center/ Office Administration R...
<Issue name> <Status of Issue> 							<Reference-ID>

<profile pic> Comment on this request.. 				People involved: Lily Williams

Activity:
Your requests status changed to Waiting for Customer. Today 12:11 PM <LATEST>

Lily Williams Today 12:11 PM 							You can: Add a comment, Add attachment
Hi,
What is the name of the printer that youa re referring to?

Cheers,
Support

Details: 		Today 11:09 AM
Description
I am trying to print on level 8, but the printer is not showing up in my list.

Priority:
Major

How agents see those corresponding issues:

<Reference-ID>

Need system access

Edit Comment 	Assign 	MoreV 		Resolve this issue 		Respond to customer 	Admin V 		Create KB article 	Export V
Details: 													SLAs
Type: 			Access 			Status: 		Waiting for Supp.. 		3:59 (Clock) Time to resolution:
Priority: 		^ Major 						(View Workflow) 					 within 4h
Components: 	Intranet 		Resolution: 	Unresolved
Labels: 		new-account 											People
																			Assigned: Unassigned
																					  Assign to me

Description:
need to take SS's 														Reporter 	  Lily Williams
																		Request Participants None
Attachments:															Votes: 		  0
					Drop files here to upload or browse. 				Watchers: 	  0 Start watching this issue

Tempo 																	Service Desk Request
	01/May/15-31/May/15 < Current > Report > [CALENDAR] [PEN]Log Work  		Request type: Request a new account
	Date 		Description 				Worked 							Customer status: Waiting for Support
																			Channel: 	Portal

																			View customer request

Activity
	All 	Comments 	Work Log 	History 	ACtivity 	Transitions Dates
There are no comments yet on this issue. 									Created: 	Just now
																			Updated: 	Just now

<Profile pic> Click to add comment 											Collaborators

Administer JIRA Service Desk
--------------------------------------------

Get Started administering JIRA Service Desk

Administer JIRA Service Desk

Set up your service desk

Create service desk request types

Make queues for your team

Add service desk agents

Customize your service desk channels

Bring your service desk to the next level

Introduce customers to your service desk

Explore a sample project

----------------------------------

Welcome to JIRA Service Desk for admins! In this tutorial, we will introduce you to your
workspace and walk you through the process of setting up a service desk project for your
team of agents and a corresponding customer-facing site (which we call the customer portal).

We will be focusing on the basic JIRA Service Desk features and tasks to help you get up and
running quickly. By the end of this tutorial, you will have:

Set up 1 service desk project

Added 3 agents

Prepared your customer portal to receive customer requests

A quick look at JIRA Service Desk:

Queues

As an admin, you will set up and configure queues for your agents. Your agents will then
view and work on issues from the same tab:

/// Jira 		Dashboards V 		Projects V 		Issues V 		Boards V 	Create 				Search (Magnifying glass) 	Megaphone 	(?)V 	(COG)V 		<Profile>V
<Icon> 												All open 										(i) 	(PEN) Edit queue
//Row of icons  Queues
down 			All Open 	46 						Time to resolution 	T 	Key 	 Status 		Summary 			Created 		P 	Reporter 
				Unassigned issues 4 				-28:51 (clock) 			MOIHD-73 OPEN 			Intranet down? 		16/Jul/17 			Ryan Lee
				Assigned to me 42
				> Waiting on me 14
				Incidents 10
				> Reported in the l.. 0
				> Critical 	4
				Service requests 30
				> Due in 24h 0
				Change 	4
				> Ready for implementation 2
				> Emergency change 0
				Problem 2
				> Completed last 3.. 0
				Recently resolved 	38
				+ New queue
